    Approval of warrants by Judicial Commissioners

      19 Approval of warrants by Judicial Commissioners

        (1) In deciding whether to approve a person’s decision to issue a warrant under this Chapter, a Judicial Commissioner must review the person’s conclusions as to the following matters—
          (a) whether the warrant is necessary on relevant grounds (see subsection (3)), and
          (b) whether the conduct that would be authorised by the warrant is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct.

        (2) In doing so, the Judicial Commissioner must apply the same principles as would be applied by a court on an application for judicial review.

        (3) In subsection (1)(a) “relevant grounds” means—
          (a) in the case of a warrant to be issued by the Secretary of State, grounds falling within section 14(3);
          (b) in the case of a warrant to be issued by the Scottish Ministers, grounds falling within section 17(3).

        (4) Where a Judicial Commissioner refuses to approve a decision to issue a warrant under this Chapter, the Judicial Commissioner must give the person who made that decision written reasons for the refusal.

        (5) Where a Judicial Commissioner, other than the Investigatory Powers Commissioner, refuses to approve a decision to issue a warrant under this Chapter, the person who made that decision may ask the Investigatory Powers Commissioner to decide whether to approve the decision to issue the warrant.

      20 Approval of warrants issued in urgent cases

        (1) This section applies where—
          (a) a targeted interception warrant or mutual assistance warrant is issued without the approval of a Judicial Commissioner, and
          (b) the person who issued the warrant considered that there was an urgent need to issue it.

        (2) The person who issued the warrant must inform a Judicial Commissioner that it has been issued.

        (3) The Judicial Commissioner must, before the end of the relevant period—
          (a) decide whether to approve the decision to issue the warrant, and
          (b) notify the person of the Judicial Commissioner’s decision.
          “The relevant period” means the period ending with the fifth working day after the day on which the warrant was issued.

        (4) But subsection (3) does not apply if the Judicial Commissioner is notified that the warrant is to be renewed under section 25 before the end of the relevant period.

        (5) If a Judicial Commissioner refuses to approve the decision to issue a warrant, the warrant ceases to have effect.

        (6) Section 21 contains further provision about what happens when a warrant ceases to have effect as a result of this section 21 

      21 Warrants ceasing to have effect under section 20

        (1) This section applies where a warrant ceases to have effect as a result of section 20.

        (2) The person to whom the warrant is addressed must, so far as is reasonably practicable, secure that anything in the process of being done under the warrant stops as soon as possible.

        (3) The Judicial Commissioner who refused to approve the warrant may—
          (a) direct that any of the intercepted material or related communications data obtained under the warrant is destroyed;
          (b) impose conditions as to the use or retention of any of that material or data.

        (4) The Judicial Commissioner—
          (a) may require an affected party to make representations about how the Judicial Commissioner should exercise any function under subsection (3), and
          (b) must have regard to any such representations made by an affected party (whether or not as a result of a requirement imposed under paragraph (a)).

        (5) Each of the following is an “affected party” for the purposes of subsection (4)—
          (a) the person who decided to issue the warrant;
          (b) the person to whom the warrant is addressed.

        (6) The person who decided to issue the warrant may ask the Investigatory Powers Commissioner to review a decision made by any other Judicial Commissioner under subsection (3).

        (7) On a review under subsection (6), the Investigatory Powers Commissioner may—
          (a) confirm the Judicial Commissioner’s decision, or
          (b) make a fresh determination.
          (8) Nothing in this section or section 20 affects the lawfulness of—
          (a) anything done under the warrant before it ceases to have effect;
          (b) if anything is in the process of being done under the warrant when it ceases to have effect—
            (i) anything done before that thing could be stopped, or
            (ii) anything done which it is not reasonably practicable to stop.
