    Further provision about warrants

      22 Decisions to issue warrants to be taken personally by Ministers

        (1) The decision to issue a warrant under this Chapter must be taken personally by—
          (a) the Secretary of State, or
          (b) in the case of a warrant to be issued by the Scottish Ministers, a member of the Scottish Government.

        (2) Before a warrant under this Chapter is issued, it must be signed by the person who has taken the decision to issue it.

        (3) Subsections (1) and (2) are subject to—
          (a) subsection (4) (urgent cases), and
          (b) section 28 (special rules for certain mutual assistance warrants).

        (4) In an urgent case, the warrant may be signed by a senior official designated by the Secretary of State or (as the case may be) the Scottish Ministers for that purpose.

        (5) In such a case, the warrant must contain a statement that the case is an urgent case in which the Secretary of State or (as the case may be) the Scottish Ministers have personally expressly authorised the issue of the warrant.

        (6) In this section “senior official” means—
          (a) in the case of a warrant to be issued by the Secretary of State, a member of the Senior Civil Service or a member of the Senior Management Structure of Her Majesty’s Diplomatic Service;
          (b) in the case of a warrant to be issued by the Scottish Ministers, a member of the staff of the Scottish Administration who is a member of the Senior Civil Service.

      23 Requirements that must be met by warrants

        (1) A warrant under this Chapter must contain a provision stating whether it is a targeted interception warrant, a targeted examination warrant or a mutual assistance warrant.

        (2) A warrant issued under this Chapter must be addressed to the person by whom, or on whose behalf, the application for the warrant was made.

        (3) A warrant that relates to a particular person or organisation, or to a single set of premises, must name or describe that person or organisation or those premises.

        (4) A warrant that relates to a group of persons who share a common purpose or  who carry on (or may carry on) a particular activity must—
          (a) describe that purpose or activity, and
          (b) name or describe as many of those persons as it is reasonably practicable to name or describe.

        (5) A warrant that relates to more than one person or organisation, or more than one set of premises, where the conduct authorised or required by the warrant is for the purposes of the same investigation or operation, must—
          (a) describe the investigation or operation, and
          (b) name or describe as many of those persons or organisations, or as many of those sets of premises, as it is reasonably practicable to name or describe.

        (6) A warrant that relates to any testing or training activities must—
          (a) describe those activities, and
          (b) name or describe as many of the persons whose communications will or may be intercepted as it is reasonably practicable to name or describe.

        (7) In subsection (6) “testing or training activities” means—
          (a) the testing, maintenance or development of apparatus, systems or other capabilities relating to the interception of communications in the course of their transmission by means of a telecommunication system or to the obtaining of related communications data, or
          (b) the training of persons who carry out, or are likely to carry out, such interception or the obtaining of such data.

        (8) Where a warrant under this Chapter authorises or requires the interception of communications, the warrant must describe those communications by specifying the addresses, numbers, apparatus, or other factors, or combination of factors, that are to be used for identifying the communications.

        (9) Any factor, or combination of factors, specified in accordance with subsection (8) must be one that identifies communications which are likely to be or to include—
          (a) communications from, or intended for, any person named or described in the warrant, or
          (b) communications originating on, or intended for transmission to, any premises named or described in the warrant.

      24 Duration of warrants

        (1) A warrant under this Chapter, if it is not renewed before the end of the relevant period (see subsection (2)), ceases to have effect at the end of that period.

        (2) In this section “the relevant period”—
          (a) in the case of an urgent warrant (see subsection (3)), means the period ending with the fifth working day after the day on which the warrant was issued;
          (b) in any other case, means the period of 6 months beginning with—
            (i) the day on which the warrant was issued, or
            (ii) in the case of a warrant that has been renewed, the day after the day at the end of which the warrant would have ceased to have effect if it had not been renewed.

        (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(a) an “urgent warrant” is a warrant which—
          (a) was issued in an urgent case as mentioned in section 22(4), and
          (b) has not been renewed.

        (4) For provision about the renewal of warrants, see section 25.

      25 Renewal of warrants

        (1) If the renewal conditions are met, a warrant issued under this Chapter may be renewed, at any time before the end of the relevant period, by an instrument issued by the appropriate person.

        (2) The renewal conditions are—
          (a) that the appropriate person considers that the warrant continues to be necessary on any relevant grounds,
          (b) that the appropriate person considers that the conduct that would be authorised by the renewed warrant continues to be proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct,
          (c) that, in the case of a targeted examination warrant, the appropriate person considers that the warrant continues to be necessary to authorise the selection of intercepted material for examination in breach of the prohibition in section 119(4), and
          (d) that the decision to renew the warrant has been approved by a Judicial Commissioner.

        (3) The appropriate person is—
          (a) in the case of a warrant issued by the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State;
          (b) in the case of a warrant issued by the Scottish Ministers, a member of the Scottish Government.

        (4) “Relevant grounds” means—
          (a) in the case of a warrant issued by the Secretary of State, grounds falling within section 14(3);
          (b) in the case of a warrant issued by the Scottish Ministers, grounds falling within section 17(3).

        (5) The decision to renew a warrant must be taken personally by the appropriate person, and the instrument renewing the warrant must be signed by that person.

        (6) Section 16 (additional protection for Members of Parliament etc.) applies in relation to a decision to renew a warrant as it applies in relation to a decision to issue a warrant.

        (7) Section 19 (approval of warrants by Judicial Commissioners) applies in relation to a decision to renew a warrant as it applies in relation to a decision to issue a warrant (and accordingly any reference in that section to the person who decided to issue the warrant is to be read as a reference to the person who decided to renew it).

        (8) In this section “the relevant period” has the same meaning as in section 24.

        (9) This section is subject to section 28 (special rules for certain mutual assistance warrants).

      26 Modification of warrants

        (1) The provisions of a warrant issued under this Chapter may be modified at any time by an instrument issued by the person making the modification.

        (2) The only modifications that may be made under this section are—
          (a) adding or removing the name or description of a person, organisation or set of premises to which the warrant relates,
          (b) varying such a name or description, and
          (c) adding, varying or removing any factor specified in the warrant in accordance with section 23(8).

        (3) The decision to modify the provisions of a warrant must be taken personally by the person making the modification, and the instrument making the modification must be signed by that person.

        (4) In this section—
          (a) a modification within paragraph (a) of subsection (2) is referred to as a “major modification”, and
          (b) a modification within paragraph (b) or (c) of that subsection is referred to as a “minor modification”.

        (5) A major modification may be made by—
          (a) the Secretary of State,
          (b) a member of the Scottish Government, or
          (c) a senior official acting on behalf of the Secretary of State or (as the case may be) the Scottish Ministers.

        (6) A minor modification may be made by—
          (a) the Secretary of State,
          (b) a member of the Scottish Government,
          (c) a senior official acting on behalf of the Secretary of State or (as the case may be) the Scottish Ministers,
          (d) the person to whom the warrant is addressed, or
          (e) a person who holds a senior position in the same public authority as the person mentioned in paragraph (d).

        (7) For the purposes of subsection (6)(e) a person holds a senior position in a public authority if—
          (a) in the case of any of the intelligence services, the person is a member of the Senior Civil Service or a member of the Senior Management Structure of Her Majesty’s Diplomatic Service;
          (b) in the case of the National Crime Agency, the person is a National Crime Agency officer of the grade of Deputy Director or above;
          (c) in the case of the metropolitan police force, the Police Service of Northern Ireland or the Police Service of Scotland, a person is of or above the rank of Commander or Assistant Chief Constable;
          (d) in the case of Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs, the person is a member of the Senior Civil Service;
          (e) in the case of the Ministry of Defence—
            (i) the person is a member of the Senior Civil Service, or
            (ii) the person is of or above the rank of brigadier, commodore or air commodore.

        (8) A person may make a major modification of a warrant by adding a name or description as mentioned in subsection (2)(a) only if the person considers—
          (a) that the modification is necessary on any relevant grounds (see subsection (9)), and
          (b) that the conduct authorised by the modification is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct.
          (9) In subsection (8)(a) “relevant grounds” means—
          (a) in the case of a warrant issued by the Secretary of State, grounds falling within section 14(3);
          (b) in the case of a warrant issued by the Scottish Ministers, grounds falling within section 17(3).

        (10) Section 16 (additional protection for Members of Parliament etc.) applies in relation to a decision to make a major modification of a warrant by adding a name or description as mentioned in subsection (2)(a) as it applies in relation to a decision to issue a warrant; and accordingly where that section applies only the Secretary of State may make the modification.

        (11) Where a major modification of a warrant is made by a senior official, the Secretary of State or (in the case of a warrant issued by the Scottish Ministers) a member of the Scottish Government must be notified personally of the modification and the reasons for making it.

        (12) In this section “senior official” means—
          (a) in the case of a warrant issued by the Secretary of State, a member of the Senior Civil Service or a member of the Senior Management Structure of Her Majesty’s Diplomatic Service;
          (b) in the case of a warrant issued by the Scottish Ministers, a member of the staff of the Scottish Administration who is a member of the Senior Civil Service.
        (13) Nothing in this section applies in relation to modifying the provisions of a warrant in a way which does not affect the conduct authorised or required by it.

      27 Cancellation of warrants

        (1) Any of the appropriate persons may cancel a warrant issued under this Chapter at any time.

        (2) If any of the appropriate persons considers that—
          (a) a warrant issued under this Chapter is no longer necessary on any relevant grounds, or
          (b) that the conduct authorised by the warrant is no longer proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct, the person must cancel the warrant.

        (3) In subsection (2)(a) “relevant grounds” means—
          (a) in the case of a warrant issued by the Secretary of State, grounds falling within section 14(3);
          (b) in the case of a warrant issued by the Scottish Ministers, grounds falling within section 17(3).

        (4) For the purpose of this section “the appropriate persons” are—
          (a) in the case of a warrant issued by the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State or a senior official acting on behalf of the Secretary of State;
          (b) in the case of a warrant issued by the Scottish Ministers, a member of the Scottish Government or a senior official acting on behalf of the Scottish Ministers.

        (5) In this section “senior official” means—
          (a) in the case of a warrant issued by the Secretary of State, a member of the Senior Civil Service or a member of the Senior Management Structure of Her Majesty’s Diplomatic Service;
          (b) in the case of a warrant issued by the Scottish Ministers, a member of the staff of the Scottish Administration who is a member of the Senior Civil Service.

        (6) See also section 28 (which imposes a duty to cancel mutual assistance warrants in certain circumstances).

      28 Special rules for certain mutual assistance warrants

        (1) For the purposes of this section a warrant is a “relevant mutual assistance warrant” if—
          (a) the warrant is for the purposes of a request for assistance made under an EU mutual assistance instrument or an international mutual assistance agreement by the competent authorities of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom, and
          (b) either—
            (i) it appears that the interception subject is outside the United Kingdom, or
            (ii) the interception to which the warrant relates is to take place in relation only to premises outside the United Kingdom.

        (2) The decision to issue a relevant mutual assistance warrant may be taken by a senior official designated by the Secretary of State for that purpose.

        (3) In such a case, the warrant must contain—
          (a) a statement that the warrant is issued for the purposes of a request for assistance made under an EU mutual assistance instrument or an international mutual assistance agreement (as the case may be) by the competent authorities of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom, and
          (b) whichever of the following statements is applicable—
            (i) a statement that the interception subject appears to be outside the United Kingdom;
            (ii) a statement that the interception to which the warrant relates is to take place in relation only to premises outside the United Kingdom.

        (4) A relevant mutual assistance warrant may be renewed by a senior official designated by the Secretary of State for that purpose; and references in section 25 to the appropriate person include, in the case of such a warrant, references to that senior official.

        (5) Where a senior official renews a relevant mutual assistance warrant in accordance with subsection (4), the instrument renewing the warrant must contain—
          (a) a statement that the renewal is for the purposes of a request for assistance made under an EU mutual assistance instrument or an international mutual assistance agreement (as the case may be) by the competent authorities of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom, and
          (b) whichever of the following statements is applicable—
            (i) a statement that the interception subject appears to be outside the United Kingdom;
            (ii) a statement that the interception to which the warrant relates is to take place in relation only to premises outside the United Kingdom.

        (6) Subsection (7) applies in a case where—
          (a) a relevant mutual assistance warrant—
            (i) was issued containing the statement set out in subsection (3)(b)(i), or
            (ii) has been renewed by an instrument containing the statement set out in subsection (5)(b)(i), and
          (b) the last renewal (if any) of the warrant was a renewal by a senior official in accordance with subsection (4).

        (7) If the Secretary of State, or a senior official acting on behalf of the Secretary of State, believes that the person, group or organisation named or described in the warrant as the interception subject is in the United Kingdom, that person must cancel the warrant.

        (8) In this section—
          “the interception subject”, in relation to a warrant, means the person, group of persons or organisation about whose communications information is sought by the interception to which the warrant relates; “senior official” means a member of the Senior Civil Service or a member of the Senior Management Structure of Her Majesty’s Diplomatic Service.
