INTERNET CONNECTION RECORDS

What are they?

44
  A kind of communications data, an ICR is a record of the internet services a specific device has connected to, such as a website or instant messaging application. It is captured by the company providing access to the internet. Where available, this data may be acquired from CSPs by law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies.

45
  An ICR is not a person’s full internet browsing history. It is a record of the services that they have connected to, which can provide vital investigative leads. It would not reveal every web page that they visit or anything that they do on that web page.

Why do we need them?

46
  ICRs are vital to law enforcement investigations in number of ways. For example:
    
    To establish what services a known suspect or victim has used to communicate online, allowing investigators to request more specific communications data
    
    To establish whether a known suspect has been involved in online criminality, for example sharing indecent images of children, accessing terrorist material or fraud
    
    To identify services a suspect has accessed which could help in an investigation including, for example, mapping services.

What happens now?

47
  There is no requirement in law for CSPs to keep ICRs. Requests for ICRs can therefore only be made on a forward-looking basis where it is necessary and proportionate to do so. As a result, law enforcement agencies can often only paint a fragmented intelligence picture of a known suspect. IP address resolution identifies the sender of online communications which is provided for under the Counter Terrorism and Security Act 2015 (CTSA), but it is only possible in a limited range of cases. This is a significant problem for law enforcement. For example:

    From a sample of 6025 referrals to the Child Exploitation and Online Protection Command (CEOP) of the NCA, 862 (14%) cannot be progressed and would require the provisions in the Investigatory Powers Bill to have any prospect of doing so.
    
    That is a minimum of 862 suspected paedophiles, involved in the distribution of indecent imagery of children, who cannot be identified without this legislation.

48
  This also means that in some cases law enforcement do not have access to essential data regarding an investigation as it has not been retained – this includes, for example, the identity of an individual suspected of sharing indecent images of children or the people with whom a missing person was last in contact.

What will happen in the future?

49
  Internet service providers will be required to keep ICRs for a maximum period of 12 months. This will be invaluable to law enforcement to prevent and detect crime, to protect our national security. The Bill will build on the provisions in the CTSA that provide for the resolution of IP addresses. Bringing the powers together in one place will ensure openness and that safeguards are applied consistently.

What safeguards will there be?

50
  Applications to acquire ICRs can only be approved using the stringent application process for communications data requests (see paragraph 24-25 above) and only for a limited set of statutory purposes and subject to strict controls. Local authorities will be prohibited from acquiring ICRs. 
