OBLIGATIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS

61
  The use of investigatory powers relies heavily on the cooperation of CSPs in the UK and overseas. The assistance of CSPs is frequently required to obtain communications data relating to a person’s use of a particular service or to intercept communications sent by that service. The assistance of CSPs may also be necessary in order to gain direct access to a suspect’s device using equipment interference powers.

CSP Obligations

62
  The obligations on CSPs to provide assistance in relation to the use of investigatory powers are spread across a number of different laws:
      a. 
        The DRIPA requires CSPs to retain certain types of communications data; additional retention requirements are provided under the CTSA.
      b. 
        RIPA requires CSPs to provide communications data when served with a notice, to assist in giving effect to interception warrants, and to maintain permanent interception capabilities, including maintaining the ability to remove any encryption applied by the CSP to whom the notice relates.
      c. 
        The Telecommunications Act 1984 requires CSPs to comply with directions issued by the Secretary of State in the interests of national security; this includes the acquisition of bulk communications data.

63
  The Investigatory Powers Bill will bring together these obligations in a single, comprehensive piece of legislation. It will provide an explicit obligation on CSPs to assist in giving effect to equipment interference warrants. Only intercepting agencies will have the ability to serve such warrants, which must be authorised by the Secretary of State. The draft Bill will not impose any additional requirements in relation to encryption over and above the existing obligations in RIPA.

64
  The draft Bill will provide for the Secretary of State to require CSPs to maintain permanent capabilities relating to the powers under the draft Bill. This will replace the current obligation to maintain a permanent interception capability and will provide a clear basis in law for CSPs to maintain infrastructure and facilities to give effect to interception and other warrants.

65
  The new power will also require CSPs to provide wider assistance to law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies in the interests of national security. This will replace the general power of direction under the Telecommunications Act 1984. The new power will be subject to strict safeguards that will prevent it from being used to authorise any activity for the purpose of interference with privacy, such as authorising or requiring the disclosure of communications data.

66
  The ability for CSPs to appeal obligations will be strengthened through the draft Bill. The draft Bill will provide for the continued existence of the Technical Advisory Board (TAB), which comprises industry and agency experts and provides advice to the Secretary of State on the cost and technical feasibility of implementing a particular obligation. In future, CSPs will be able to appeal obligations (including Data Retention Notices) directly to the Secretary of State, who will be obliged to take advice from the TAB and the Investigatory Powers Commissioner. The circumstances in which appeals will be permitted will be broadened to take account of CSPs’ changes to services and infrastructure.

Overseas Companies

67
  Interception and communications data powers rely on the support of overseas companies. The existing obligation in RIPA to comply with interception warrants (including for bulk interception) and communications data acquisition notices was clarified last year through DRIPA. Other investigatory powers (such as data retention) may rely on the support of overseas companies.

68
  The draft Bill places the same obligations on all companies providing services to the UK or in control of communications systems in the UK. However, the draft Bill only provides for those obligations to be enforced through the courts against overseas companies in respect of communications data acquisition and (targeted and bulk) interception powers. The draft Bill will include explicit provision to take account of any potential conflict of laws that overseas companies may face.

What are the key provisions in the draft Bill?

    The draft Bill will bring together all of the existing obligations on CSPs in RIPA, DRIPA, CTSA and the Telecommunications Act 1984
    
    The draft Bill will provide for notices to be given to CSPs to maintain capabilities relating to the use of powers under the draft Bill and to take steps necessary for national security
    
    A notice will not authorise or require a CSP to disclose communications or communications data in the absence of a warrant or communications data acquisition notice
    
    Appeal routes will be strengthened by allowing for appeals directly to the Secretary of State, who will take advice from the TAB and the IPC
    
    Enforcement of obligations against overseas CSPs will be limited to interception and targeted CD acquisition powers 
