PROTECTIONS FOR COMMUNICATIONS INVOLVING SENSITIVE PROFESSIONS

51
  Whilst everyone has a right to privacy, certain professions handle particularly sensitive or confidential information, which may attract additional protections. These professions include medical doctors, lawyers, journalists, Members of Parliament and the devolved legislatures, and Ministers of Religion.

Communications Data

52
  Accessing the communications data of an individual does not disclose what that person wrote or said, rather when they communicated, where, how and with whom. Communications data does therefore not attract, for example, legal professional privilege in the same way as the content of a communication between lawyer and client. However, additional protections for sensitive professions are as a matter of policy applied to requests for communications data.

53
  All applications for communications data known to be of a member of a sensitive profession must set out clearly any circumstances which could lead to an unusual amount of intrusion, invasion of privacy or infringement of a person’s right to freedom of expression. In addition the Designated Person who signs off an authorisation to access the communications data of a member of a sensitive profession must consider whether obtaining the information is in the public interest.

54
  The Interception of Communications Commissioner published a report on 4 February 2015 in respect of journalists’ sources. Following this report law enforcement applications to find the source of information given to a journalist can currently only be granted if a court order is obtained from a judge under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE). This was an interim measure.

55
  The Investigatory Powers Bill will put in statute a requirement for all applications to access the communications data for the purpose of identifying or confirming the identity of a journalist’s source to be authorised by a Judicial Commissioner. The draft Bill will also require that statutory Codes of Practice issued in respect of communications data must make provision for additional safeguards that apply to sensitive professions.

Interception and Equipment Interference Warrant

56
  Information obtained by interception or equipment interference can reveal the content of a communication and make clear what is being said or written. As a consequence it involves a higher level of intrusion, particularly where particularly confidential or sensitive information is involved.

57
  The Investigatory Powers Bill will introduce a two stage authorisation process such that a Secretary of State must personally issue the warrant, and before it comes into force a Judicial Commissioner must approve the authorisation. Strict procedures will govern how any information collected under the warrant is used, kept and destroyed. Codes of Practice issued under the draft Bill in respect of interception and equipment interference (including in bulk) will make provision for additional protections relating to persons in sensitive professions.

58
  The Codes of Practice will make clear that where the law enforcement agencies and security and intelligence agencies wish to obtain the communications of, or with, a member of one of the sensitive professions, particular consideration must be given where confidential information might be involved. They must make a compelling case to the Secretary of State explaining why it is necessary and proportionate to seek the warrant and what additional protections they will apply to any particularly sensitive material obtained, such as that which is legally privileged. They must also notify the IPC that sensitive material has been obtained as soon as it is practical to do so.

59
  More detail on the current protections afforded to confidential material is available in the updated Interception of Communications Code of Practice and Equipment Interference Code of Practice.

60
  The draft Bill provides that, in addition to approval by a Judicial Commissioner, the Prime Minister must be consulted before the Secretary of State can decide to issue a warrant to intercept an MP’s communications. This will cover all warrants for targeted interception and all equipment interference that is carried out by the Security and Intelligence Agencies. It will also include a requirement for the Prime Minister to be consulted prior to the selection for examination of a Parliamentarian’s communications collected under a bulk interception or equipment interference warrant. It will apply to MPs, members of the House of Lords, UK MEPs and members of the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland Parliaments/Assemblies.
