EQUIPMENT INTERFERENCE

What is it?

27
  Equipment interference allows the security and intelligence agencies, law enforcement and the armed forces to interfere with electronic equipment such as computers and smartphones in order to obtain data, such as communications from a device. Equipment interference encompasses a wide range of activity from remote access to computers to downloading covertly the contents of a mobile phone during a search.

Why do we need it?

28
  Where necessary and proportionate, law enforcement agencies and the security and intelligence agencies need to be able to access communications or other private information held on computers, in order to gain valuable intelligence in national security and serious crime investigations and to help gather evidence for use in criminal prosecutions. Equipment interference plays an important role in mitigating the loss of intelligence that may no longer be obtained through other techniques, such as interception, as a result of sophisticated encryption. It can sometimes be the only method by which to acquire the data. The armed forces use this technique in some situations to gather data in support of military operations.

What happens now?

29. Equipment interference is currently used by law enforcement agencies and the security and intelligence agencies; more sensitive and intrusive techniques are generally available only to the security and intelligence agencies and a small number of law enforcement agencies, including the National Crime Agency. Equipment interference is currently provided for under general property interference powers in the Intelligence Services Act 1994 and the Police Act 1997. A draft Code of Practice was published earlier this year and governs the use of equipment interference powers by the security and intelligence agencies.

What will happen in the future?

30
  Building on recommendations made by David Anderson QC and the ISC, the draft Bill will provide for a new, more explicit equipment interference regime that will govern the use of these techniques by law enforcement agencies, the security and intelligence agencies and the armed forces. It will limit the use of other powers to obtain stored communications and private information directly from devices in the absence of a warrant and will introduce new, enhanced safeguards. The use of this power will be limited to the same statutory purposes as interception. Law enforcement agencies’ use of equipment interference will be permitted for the prevention and detection of serious crime only.

What safeguards are there?

31 
  Use of these powers by the security and intelligence agencies or the armed forces currently requires authorisation by the Secretary of State. Authorisations for law enforcement may be issued by the Chief Constable or equivalent. The Investigatory Powers Bill will strengthen authorisation safeguards so that the issue of warrants will in future also be subject to approval by a Judicial Commissioner.

32 
  The IPC will oversee the use of equipment interference powers by law enforcement, the security and intelligence agencies, and the armed forces. He will ensure that the detailed safeguards set out in the legislation and accompanying Codes of Practice are stringently applied and that appropriate arrangements are in place to handle the sensitive material obtained. The Commissioner will audit how the authorities use the power and report publicly on what he finds.

What are the key provisions in the draft Bill?

    The draft Bill will build on the recommendations made by David Anderson QC and the ISC by creating a new, specific equipment interference regime
    
    It will strengthen the authorisation regime so that warrants will only come into force having been approved by a Judicial Commissioner
    
    It will limit the use of this technique to the same statutory purposes as interception; law enforcement agency warrants will only be issued for serious crime
    
    As some equipment interference techniques are used by all law enforcement agencies, the draft Bill will permit all police forces to undertake equipment interference; a Code of Practice will regulate the use of more sensitive and intrusive techniques
    
    The draft Bill will create a new obligation on domestic CSPs to assist in giving effect to equipment interference warrants
