BULK POWERS

What are they?

33
  Access to bulk data is crucial to monitor known and high-priority threats but is also a vital tool in discovering new targets and identifying emerging threats. The law provides for the use of interception, communications data and equipment interference powers in bulk. These can be used to obtain large volumes of data that are likely to include communications or other data relating to terrorists and serious criminals. Robust safeguards govern access to this data to ensure it is only examined where it is necessary and proportionate to do so.

Why do we need them?

34
  The security and intelligence agencies frequently have only small fragments of intelligence or early unformed leads about people overseas who pose a threat to the UK. Equally, terrorists, criminals and hostile foreign intelligence services are increasingly sophisticated at evading detection by traditional means. Access to large volumes of data enables the security and intelligence agencies to piece together communications and other data and identify patterns of behaviour. This enables them to:

    Establish links between known subjects of interest, improving understanding of their behaviour and the connections they are making or the multiple communications methods they may be using; and, 

    Search for traces of activity by individuals who may not yet be known to the agencies but who surface in the course of an investigation, or to identify potential threats and patterns of activity that might indicate national security concern.

35
  Bulk powers are used to advance investigations both in the UK and overseas. They are integral to the work of the security and intelligence agencies.

What happens now?

36
  Current legislation provides for investigatory powers to be used to acquire data in bulk:
    
    a. 
      Bulk Interception – currently provided for under RIPA, this allows for the interception of large volumes of communications in order to acquire the communications of terrorists and serious criminals that would not otherwise be available.
    
    b. 
      Bulk Communications Data Acquisition – currently provided for under section 94 of the Telecommunications Act 1984, this is used to identify subjects of interest within the UK and overseas, and to understand relationships between suspects in a way that would not be possible using only targeted communications data powers.
    
    c. 
      Bulk Equipment Interference – currently provided for under the Intelligence Services Act 1994, equipment interference is used increasingly to mitigate the inability to acquire intelligence through conventional bulk interception and to access data from computers which may never otherwise have been obtainable.

37
The responsibility for authorising bulk warrants (or in the case of the Telecommunications Act 1984, issuing directions) currently rests with the Secretary of State. Additional safeguards, including robust internal safeguards, apply in relation to the accessing of material acquired under such warrants and directions. The security and intelligence agencies’ handling arrangements for data acquired under section 94 of the Telecommunications Act 1984 were published alongside the draft Bill.

What will happen in the future?

38
  David Anderson QC, the ISC of Parliament and the panel convened by the RUSI all concluded that new legislation should make explicit provision for bulk powers. The Investigatory Powers Bill provides a clear statutory framework for all of the bulk powers available to the security and intelligence agencies and introduces robust, consistent safeguards across all of those powers.

What safeguards will there be?

39
  The draft Bill will limit the ability to apply for a bulk warrant to the security and intelligence agencies. It will require that any bulk warrant must be necessary in the interests of national security. Warrants will be issued by the Secretary of State and must be approved by a Judicial Commissioner before coming into force.

40
  The draft Bill will require that bulk interception and bulk equipment interference warrants may only be issued where the main purpose of the activity is to acquire intelligence relating to individuals outside the UK. Conduct within the UK or interference with the privacy of persons in the UK will be permitted only to the extent that it is necessary for that purpose.

41
  At the moment, a certificate authorised alongside the warrant limits the purposes for which content may be selected for examination under a bulk interception warrant; the same limitations do not apply to related communications data that may be acquired under a bulk interception warrant. The draft Bill will introduce new, enhanced safeguards before data obtained under bulk warrants may be accessed. Before accessing data, analysts will need to ensure that it is necessary to do so for a specific Operational Purpose authorised by the Secretary of State and approved by the Judicial Commissioner when the warrant is issued.

42
  Additional protections will apply to content acquired under bulk interception and bulk equipment interference powers, such as the contents of an email or a photograph saved on a mobile device. Where an analyst wishes to examine the content of a UK person’s data acquired by these means, he or she will need to seek a targeted interception or equipment interference warrant from the Secretary of State and a Judicial Commissioner.

43
  The draft Bill builds on recommendations made by David Anderson QC and the RUSI panel allowing the Secretary of State to issue a bulk warrant authorising the obtaining of related communications data (CD that is within or connected to the content of a communication) only.

What are the key provisions in the draft Bill?

    The draft Bill will provide a clear statutory framework for the issue of bulk interception, communications data and equipment interference authorisations The ability to seek bulk warrants will be limited to the security and intelligence agencies
    
    The issue of a bulk warrant must be necessary in the interests of national security
    
    Bulk interception and bulk equipment interference warrants must be focused on obtaining data relating to persons outside the UK
    
    Bulk warrants will only come into force once they have been authorised by the Secretary of State and approved by a Judicial Commissioner
    
    Access to any data obtained under a bulk warrant must be necessary for a specific Operational Purpose approved by the Secretary of State and a Judicial Commissioner
    
    Additional safeguards will apply in respect of content acquired under bulk interception and bulk equipment interference warrants relating to persons in the UK
    
    The draft Bill also provides additional safeguards for the acquisition and use of bulk personal datasets by the security and intelligence agencies
