OVERSIGHT

What happens now?

5
  The UK’s system of oversight for law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies’ use of investigatory powers is provided for in different Acts of Parliament. These include the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA), the Police Act 1997, and the Justice and Security Act 2013 (JSA). Oversight of the powers and their use is carried out by a number of different bodies.

6
  Parliamentary oversight is carried out by the cross-party ISC, whose powers were strengthened by the JSA. Independent non-Parliamentary oversight is carried out by:
    
    The Interception of Communications Commissioner (IoCC) who oversees how public authorities use their interception and communications data powers under RIPA and powers under section 94 of the Telecommunications Act. 
    
    The Chief Surveillance Commissioner (CSC) who oversees how law enforcement agencies use covert surveillance powers and covert human intelligence sources under RIPA Part II and the Police Act 1997.
    
    The Intelligence Services Commissioner (ISCom) who oversees how the intelligence agencies use the powers available to them under RIPA Part II (covert surveillance and covert human intelligence sources) and the Intelligence Services Act 1994.

Right of redress

7
  The Investigatory Powers Tribunal (IPT) investigates complaints that law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies have used their covert investigative techniques unlawfully or claims that the intelligence or law enforcement agencies have breached human rights legislation. It is an independent Tribunal comprised of judges and senior members of the legal profession.

Why does oversight need to change?

8
  The reports published by David Anderson QC, the ISC and the RUSI panel all agreed that our oversight regime should be strengthened. The present system of three separate oversight bodies with overlapping responsibilities and distinct identities is more confusing than a single, authoritative body which has all the skills and resources it needs. 

What will happen in the future?

9
  The draft Bill will create a single new independent and more powerful IPC. The Commissioner will be properly supported and will have a significantly expanded role in authorising the use of investigatory powers and a wide-ranging and self-determined remit to oversee any aspect of how law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies use the powers and capabilities available to them. 

10
  The IPC will be a senior judge and with his supporting staff will have three key roles. First, to authorise and approve the use of investigatory powers. Judicial Commissioners, who will be serving or former High Court judges, will undertake this role. Secondly, there will be an inspection role. The IPC will audit compliance and undertake investigations. Judicial Commissioners will undertake this role and will be supported by a team of expert inspectors. 

11
  Thirdly, the new Commissioner will have a clear mandate to inform Parliament and the public about the need for and use of investigatory powers. The Commissioner will report publicly and make recommendations on what he finds in the course of his work. He will also publish guidance when it is required on the proper use of investigatory powers. The Commissioner will have a strong public profile and active media and online presence so that he is quickly established as an authoritative source of advice and information. To support these three roles, the Commissioner will also have dedicated legal, technical and communications support.

12
  The draft Bill will also strengthen the right of redress by allowing a domestic right of appeal from the IPT.

What are the key provisions in the draft Bill?

    The draft Bill will replace the IoCC, the CSC and the ISCom with a powerful new IPC
    
    The IPC will be supported by Judicial Commissioners, who will themselves be senior judges; they will be supported by a staff of experts
    
    The Judicial Commissioners will, for the first time, be responsible for approving the issue of interception, equipment interference and bulk warrants
    
    The Judicial Commissioners will also oversee the use of all of the powers under the draft Bill and will be required to publish their findings in an annual report
    
    The IPC will have a power to inform individuals who have been the subject of serious errors by law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies
    
    The IPT will be strengthened through the creation of a new domestic right of appeal
