BULK PERSONAL DATASETS

What are they?

69
  Bulk Personal Datasets (BPDs) are sets of personal information about a large number of individuals, the majority of whom will not be of any interest to the security and intelligence agencies. The datasets are held on electronic systems for the purposes of analysis in the security and intelligence agencies. Examples of these datasets include the telephone directory or the electoral roll.

Why do we need them?

70
  BPDs are essential in helping the security and intelligence agencies identify subjects of interest or individuals who surface during the course of an investigation, to establish links between individuals and groups, to understand better a subject of interest’s behaviour and connections and quickly to exclude the innocent. In short, they enable the agencies to join the dots in an investigation and to focus their attention on individuals or organisations that threaten our national security.

What happens now?

71
  The security and intelligence agencies have powers under the Security Service Act 1989 and the Intelligence Services Act 1994 to acquire and use BPDs to help them fulfil their statutory functions, including protecting national security. The use of BPD is subject to stringent internal handling arrangements and the regime is overseen by the Intelligence Services Commissioner. BPDs may be acquired using investigatory powers, from other public sector bodies or commercially from the private sector.

What will happen in the future?

72
  The Investigatory Powers Bill will significantly enhance the safeguards that apply to the acquisition and use of BPD under the Security Service Act 1989 and the Intelligence Services Act 1994.

What safeguards will there be?

73
  The Secretary of State will have to approve class-based warrants for a period of six months if it is necessary and proportionate for the agency to have access to that class of BPDs. As will be the case for interception and equipment interference authorisations, a Judicial Commissioner must also approve the warrant. If the agencies need access to a BPD that is not covered by a class warrant they will need to seek a specific warrant which is also subject to both Secretary of State authorisation and Judicial Commissioner approval.

74
  A statutory Code of Practice will set out additional safeguards which apply to how the agencies access, store, destroy and disclose information contained in the BPDs.

75
  The Investigatory Powers Commissioner will oversee how the agencies use these datasets. Supported by a team of Judicial Commissioners and technical and legal experts, the Commissioner will audit how the agencies use them and they will report publicly on what they find.

What are the key provisions in the draft Bill?

    The draft Bill will provide for new safeguards in respect of the security and intelligence agencies’ acquisition and use of BPD
    
    Class or specific warrants for the security and intelligence agencies will beissued by the Secretary of State and will be approved by a Judicial Commissioner.
