CONTEXT
1	
	The draft Investigatory Powers Bill will govern the use and oversight of investigatory powers by law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies. It builds on the work of three comprehensive reviews undertaken over the past year. Those reviews, carried out by David Anderson QC, the Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation, the Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament (ISC), and a panel convened by the Royal United Services Institute (RUSI), between them made 198 recommendations.
2
	All three reviews agreed that the use of these powers will remain vital to the work of law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies in the future. Collectively, they proposed reforms to the way these powers are overseen and recommended the introduction of consistent safeguards and greater openness. 
3
	The draft Investigatory Powers Bill will transform the law relating to the use and oversight of these powers. It will strengthen safeguards and introduce world-leading oversight arrangements. The draft Bill will do three things:
		
		First, it will bring together all of the powers already available to law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies to obtain communications and data about communications. It will make these powers – and the safeguards that apply to them – clear and understandable.
		
		Second, the draft Bill will radically overhaul the way these powers are authorised and overseen. It will introduce a ‘double-lock’ for interception warrants, so that, following Secretary of State authorisation, these – and other warrants – cannot come into force until they have been approved by a judge. And it will create a powerful new Investigatory Powers Commissioner (IPC) to oversee how these powers are used.
		
		Third, it will make sure powers are fit for the digital age. The draft Bill will make provision for the retention of internet connection records (ICRs) in order for law enforcement to identify the communications service to which a device has connected. This will restore capabilities that have been lost as a result of changes in the way people communicate. 
		
4
	This guide provides an overview of the key provisions in the draft Investigatory Powers Bill. It should be read alongside the draft Bill and the accompanying Explanatory Notes, which have been published at the same time for public consultation and prelegislative scrutiny.
